---
eip: 7550
title: Transient ERC-20 Approvals
description: Transient ERC-20 approvals via a new contract method
author: Alex Kroeger (@akroeger-circle), Joey Santoro (@joeysantoro), Moody Salem (@moodysalem)
discussions-to: TODO
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: ERC
created: 2023-10-26
requires: 20, 1153
---

## Abstract
This standard specifies a single-transaction [ERC-20](./erc-20.md) token approval mechanism as a cheaper and more secure augmentation of standard token approval functionality.

Unlike standard [ERC-20](./erc-20.md) approvals, transient approvals will grant a spender access to one's balance only for the duration of the transaction in which the approval is set.

## Motivation

[ERC-20](./erc-20.md) approvals empower complex smart contract operation of token balances. These are typically set either via [ERC-20](./erc-20.md) `approve` or via [ERC-2612](./erc-2612.md) `permit`.

The existing [ERC-20](./erc-20.md) `allowance` of a token is persistent until revoked or used. This has two drawbacks:
* gas cost of persistent storage: existing ERC-20 approvals require an `SSTORE` operation, which is relatively expensive, to set an allowance and additionally every time the allowance is modified
* security: if a bug is later found and exploited in an approved contract that allows an attacker to spend allowed balances in an unxpected way, users' funds can be stolen

Transient approvals simultaneously addresses both issues of existing [ERC-20](./erc-20.md) allowances.

First, transient approvals address the gas cost issue by allowing the use of [EIP-1153](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-1153) transient storage opcodes, which have a much lower cost than their permanent storage conterparts.

Second, transient approvals address the security issue by binding the approval to a single transaction only. Users of transient approvals are therefore not exposing their funds to exploits in the smart contract outside of the transaction in which the transient approval is set.

## Specification

Compliant contracts must implement 2 new methods and 1 new event in addition to [ERC-20](./erc-20.md).

Additionally, `transferFrom` must be modified to recognize allowances set by `transientApprove`.

### Modified Methods

#### transferFrom
The implementation of `transferFrom` MUST recognize allowances set via `transientApprove`. `transferFrom` SHOULD exclusively exhaust the allowance set by `transientApprove` prior to checking or using the allowance set by `approve`.

### New Methods

#### transientAllowance

Returns the amount which `_spender` is still allowed to withdraw from `_owner` via the `_owner`'s transient allowance.

``` sol
function transientAllowance(address _owner, address _spender) external view returns (uint256)
```

#### transientApprove

Allows the `_spender` to withdraw from your account multiple times, up to the `_value` amount, within the transaction that this function is called. If this function is called again, the transient allowance MUST be overwritten with `_value`.

``` sol
function transientApprove(address _spender, uint256 _value) external returns (bool success)
```

### New Events

#### TransientApproval
MUST trigger on any successful call to `transientApprove`.

``` sol
event TransientApproval(address indexed _owner, address indexed _spender, uint256 _value)
```

## Rationale

### Modifying the existing transferFrom method
This ERC indicates that the existing [ERC-20](./erc-20.md) `transferFrom` method should be modified to consider transient allowances. This is proposed in lieu of proposing a new transfer method for spending the transient allowance in order to make this ERC compatible with existing DeFi protocols that utilize `transferFrom` without modifying said protocols.

### Spending the transient allowance first
The specification states that the transient allowance should be used first before considering the existing [ERC-20](./erc-20.md) allowance. This recommendation is made to reduce gas cost.

[EIP-1153](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-1153) transient storage is cheaper to interact with than permanent storage. Using up the transient allowance first can result in lower cost if it makes it unnecessary to interact with the allowance set by `approve`.


## Backwards Compatibility

Transient Approval is fully backwards compatible with [ERC-20](./erc-20.md).

### Usability Considerations for EOAs
The `transientApprove` function is not currently practical for EOAs. If an EOA calls the `transientApprove` function, nothing else can be done within the same transaction, making the approval useless.

`transientApprove` will become useful for EOAs if [EIP-7702](https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-7702.md) is adopted, as EOAs will be able to make multiple direct calls within a single transaction.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
